---
layout: post
title:  "Rings and their key Theorems"
date:   2018-2-20 07:51:12 +0800
categories: jekyll update
---


<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.0/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>

<h2><b>Recap of what a ring is</b></h2>
A ring is an abelian group with multiplication "added" on, so it has an identity $$ 1_{R} $$, with the expected associtivity and distributivity properties. It doesn't need multiplicative inverses. 

<b>Associated objects</b>

<ul>
<li>Subrings: obvious!</li>
<li>Units: elements with multiplicative inverses</li>
</ul>

<b>Extrapolated objects of R </b>

<ul>
<li>Polynomial rings R(X) : <b>Euclidean algorithm applies</b> </li>
<li>Formal power series R((X))</li>
<li>Laurent polynomials</li>
<li>Laurent series</li>
<li>The set of R valued functions from some set A to R </li>
</ul>

<b>Properties of rings</b>
<ul>
<li>Integral domain: ab = 0 implies either a or b is 0 (implies field of fractions)</li>
<li>Pricipal ideal domain: every ideal is principal (has a generating element)</li>
</ul>

<b>Theorems linking the properties</b>
<ul>
<li> <b>Finite</b> integral domain implies a field (very strong). Proof: map r to ar for some a non zero. This is an injective map. Hence, it's also surjective at the field is finite. So there's an r with ar = 1.'</li>
<li>If R is an integral domain then so is R(X)</li>
<li> A non-zero ring R is a field if and only if the ideals are \( \{ 0\} \) and \( R \) </li>
</ul>

If R is an <b>Integral domain</b>, then we can extend it to a field of fractions $$ \mathbb{F}$$. In this case $$ R \leq \mathbb{F} $$, and every element is of the form $$ ab^{-1} $$, with $$b^{-1}$$ the multiplicative inverse in $$ \mathbb{F}$$.  

<h2>Homomorphisms, Quotient Rings, Ideals</h2>

<b>Ideal Definition</b>

An ideal is a subgroup with a strong multiplicative property!

<b>Associated objects with ideals</b>
<ul>
<li>Ideal generated by an element</li>
<li>Ideal generated by a set (finite sums)</li>
<li>Principal ideal - smallest ideal containing an element</li>
<li>Characteristic of the ring</li>
</ul>

<b>Properties of ideals</b>

<i>Maximal ideals</i>
An ideal $$ I $$ is maximal in $$ R $$ if $$ I \neq R$$ but if $$ I \subset J \unlhd R$$, then $$ I = J $$ or $$ J = R $$
<i>Prime ideals</i>
An ideal is prime if $$ ab \in I $$ implies either $$ a $$ or $$ b $$ is in $$ I $$.   
<b>Ideal theorems</b>
<ul>
<li>We can form a well defined quotient ring with an ideal</li>
</ul>

<b>Theorems on ideals</b>

<ul>
<li>For an ideal I, the quotient ring R/I is a field iff I is maximal in R. Proof: if R/I field implies I and R/I are the only ideals of R/I. By ideal corresponence, there's only 1 ring containing I.'</li>
<li>For an ideal I, the quotient ring is an integral domain if and only if the ideal is prime. </li>
<li>The characteristic of an integral domain is either 0 or p</li>
</ul>

<b>Quotient Ring examples</b>
Canonical examples are $$ n \mathbb{Z} \unlhd \mathbb{Z}$$, which is the group of integers mod n, as well as something like $$ \mathbb{C}  \ (X) \cong \mathbb{C}$$

Instructive example: 
Consider 

<center>
$$ I = (X^{2} + 1) \unlhd \mathbb{R}(X)$$
</center>

Show with Euclid's algorithm that $$ R(X) / (X^{2} + 1) \cong \mathbb{C}$$

<b>Homomorphism definition</b>

A ring homomorphism from one ring to another preserves additive and multiplicative structure, and sends both the additive and multiplicative idendities to the respective identities in the target ring. 

<b>Basic Ring homomorphism theorems</b>
<ul>
<li>Injectivity iff the kernel is just the zero identity</li>
<li>The kernel of a ring homomorphism is an ideal</li>
</ul>

<h3><b>Three core isomorphism theorems</b></h3>

<b>The first isomorphsim theorem</b>

If we have a ring homomorphism $$ \theta : R \rightarrow S $$, then firstly $$ ker(\theta) \unlhd R$$ and $$ Im(\theta) \leq S$$, and 

<center>
$$ R / ker(\theta) \rightarrow Im(\theta)$$
</center>

Proof: the map $$ \Psi: R/I \rightarrow Im(\theta)$$, with $$\Psi (r + I) \mapsto \theta(r)$$. Check well defined + isomorphism. 

<b>Second isomorphism theorem</b>
Let  $$ R $$ be a subring of $$ S $$, and $$ J \unlhd S $$ and ideal. Then $$ R \cap J \unlhd S$$, $$ (R+J)/J \leq S/J$$, with 

<center>
$$ R / (R  \cap J ) \cong (R + J) /J$$
</center>

Proof: Consider the map $$ \psi : R \rightarrow S/J$$ with $$ \psi(r) \mapsto r + J$$. Check this is a ring homomorphism.  

<b>Third isomorphism theorem</b>
If $$ I $$ and $$ J $$ are ideals of $$ R $$, with $$ I \subset J $$, then $$ (R/I)/(J/I) \cong (R/J) $$
Proof: consider the ring homomorphism $$ \theta: R/I \rightarrow R/J, r+I \rightarrow r+J$$

<b>Subring, and Quotient Ring correspondence</b>

We have a bijections between: 
<ul>
<li>(<b>Additive subgroups</b> which contain an ideal I) and (<b>Additive subgroups</b> of R/I) </li>
<li>(<b>Subrings</b> of R containing I) and (<b>Subrings</b> of R/I)</li>
<li>(<b>Ideals</b> of R containing I) and (<b>Ideals</b> of R/I ) </li>
</ul>

<h2>Factorisation in integral domains, units, primes and irreducibles</h2>

<h3>Properties of integral domains</h3>

<b>Definitions</b>
<ul>
<li><b>Units</b> - has inverse. <b>Divides</b> - a = bc, say (or (a) subset of (b))</li>
<li><b>Associates</b>, when \( (a) = (b) \)</li>
<li><b>Primes</b>, when \( p \mid ab \implies p \mid a \text{ or } p \mid b \)  </li>
<li><b>Irreducibles</b>, non zero elements where if \( p = ab\), then either element is a unit. </li>
<li>Highest common factor.</li>
</ul>

<i>Euclidean domain</i>
Existence of a Euclidean function $$ \psi $$ with the following properties: 

<ul>
    <li></li>
    <li></li>
</ul>

<i>Unique factorisation domain (UFD)</i>
Being able to express elements in $$ R $$ with the following properties. 

<b>Key theorems</b>
<ul>
<li> \( (r) \) is a prime ideal \(  \iff \) \( r \) is prime or \( r =0 \).    </li>
<li>If \( r \) is prime in \( R \) then \( r \) is irreducible in \( R \).  </li>
</ul>




